---
layout: post
title:  "Acknowledgements"
main-title: "Acknowledgements"
---

Firstly, an enormous thanks to my supervisor Prof Lee Wee Sun for your
generous guidance throughout the year. I have learnt so much from our
discussions, both technical and about research in general. Thanks for
welcoming me to the National Univerisity of Singapore and giving up so
many hours to help me over the course of this project.

To Scott Sanner, Justin Domke, Steve Gould and Cheng Soon Ong, thanks
for reading early drafts and for your comments on our initial research
idea. I also wish to thank Bob Williamson for introducing me to Prof
Lee, and to Lexing Xie for being my point of contact at ANU over the
year.

I am extremely grateful to the Australian Government for the opportunity
to complete my Honours research in Singapore as part of the New Colombo
Plan, and also to John Slaney and the College of Engineering and
Computer Science (CECS) admin team at ANU for supporting me in doing
this. I also thank CECS for the assistance provided by my undergraduate
scholarship throughout my degree.

To the anonymous reviewers for the 2016 NIPS Workshop on Learning with
Tensors, thank you for your helpful comments and for accepting our
paper. To Ye Nan, our coauthor, thanks for your insights about the
algorithm and its analysis. Thanks also to Tamara Kolda and Joris Mooij
for helpful answers to my questions via email.

Finally, to my family and friends. Thanks for your many years of
support, encouragement and guidance - I would not be here without you.
